blog : Comprehensive Guide: Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 Layout, Navigation… (#1990)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/04/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling.md

## Understanding unit size in different layouts

#### Grid

In a grid layout, each unit specified in the size property represents a column, dividing the page evenly. When you assign columns to a group, it forms an internal grid with the same number of columns as the group. For example, if you have a group with 4 columns and two widgets inside it, each widget can be sized by considering those columns. If you set 1 column for the first widget and 3 columns for the second widget, the first widget will occupy 25% of the group's width, and the second widget will occupy 75%.

#### Notebook

In the Notebook layout, As you know the width for the group is fixed at **1024px**. The size unit represents the number of columns that the group will create or represent in its internal grid, increasing size will increase the number of columns in group. For example, if you have one group with a size of 12 columns, that group will create an internal grid with 12 columns, and widgets can occupy those columns using the size property where each will also represent one column in group.

#### Fixed

> The fixed layout in Dashboard 2.0 employs a flexbox design with a single row of widgets. Each width unit in this layout is set at a fixed 90px. Groups follow the same internal grid pattern as other layouts. When a widget occupies the entire screen width, it shifts to the next row. However, this layout remains unchanged for varying screen sizes, potentially resulting in empty space on larger screens.

Reviewer: This whole section explains how widgets are sized within a group, no need to differentiate between the 3 x layouts - just have a single "Sizing Widgets" section that explains how a group lays out widgets.

###  Setting element size 

To set the size of groups and widgets in Dashboard 2.0, follow these steps:

1. Go to the Dashboard 2.0 sidebar and click on the edit button next to the element you want to resize.
2. Adjust the size using the size property.

!["Image showing process of setting element size"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-setting-size.gif "Image showing process of setting element size"){data-zoomable}

## Understanding Dashboard 2.0 Theme 

The theme is a collection of colors that control the look and feel of the widgets, groups, and other elements on the page.

> In Dashboard 2.0, while adding a page ( ui-page ) we have to specify which theme it will use. By default, we have one default theme in dashboard 2.0. Additionally, we can add a new theme (ui-theme) where we need to specify colors and sizing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Dashboard 2.0, when adding a page ( ui-page ) we can specify which theme it will use. By default, we have one theme in dashboard 2.0, we can add more themes using the Dashboard 2.0 side panel.
```

### Understanding theme properties

> In the theme (`ui-theme`) configuration, there are two main sections: colors and sizing. 
> 
> Within the color section, you'll need to specify colors for Navigation, primary elements, page background, group backgrounds, and outlines.
> 
> In the sizing section, you'll define the gaps between groups, page padding, group outline radius, and gaps between widgets, all in pixels.
> 
> For additional information on the `ui-theme` settings, please refer to the [ui-theme documentation](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/config/ui-theme.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the theme (`ui-theme`) configuration, there are two main sections: 

- **Colors:** Specify colors for Navigation, primary elements, page background, group backgrounds, and outlines.
- **Sizing:** Define the gaps between groups, page padding, group outline radius, and gaps between widgets, all in pixels.

For additional information on the `ui-theme` settings, please refer to the [ui-theme documentation](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/config/ui-theme.html).
```

### Setting a new page theme

1. Navigate to the Dashboard 2.0 sidebar and switch to the theme tab.
2. Click on the top-right “+theme” button to add a new theme.
3. After specifying colors and sizing click on the top right update button to save the theme.
4. Now switch to the layout tab and click on the edit button next to the page for which you want to set a new theme.
5. In the page config, select the newly added theme in the Theme field.

!["Image showing process of adding new theme"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-adding-new-theme.gif "Image showing process of adding new theme"){data-zoomable}

> ## Dashboard 2.0 Sidebar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dashboard 2.0 Navigation
```

> In Dashboard 2.0, we have 5 different types of sidebars.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Dashboard 2.0, we have 5 different navigation options for your application.
```

> ### Exploring different types of Dashboard 2.0 sidebar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sidebar Navigation Options
```

!["Image showing 'Collapse to icon' sidebar"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-collaps-to-icon-sidebar.gif "Image showing Collapse to icon sidebar"){data-zoomable}

#### Apear over content 

When the sidebar is opened, the page is partially covered by a transparent layer, and the sidebar appears on top of this layer

!["Image showing 'Apear over content' sidebar"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-appear-over-content.gif "screenshot displaying searching for botFather bot for creating custom bot"){data-zoomable}

In this type of sidebar, you can notice how the sidebar opens without affecting the width of the page content

#### Always hide 

In this type, the sidebar is always hidden, and navigation between different pages can be achieved using the ui-control widget.

!["screenshot displaying searching for botFather bot for creating custom bot"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-always-hidden.png "screenshot displaying searching for botFather bot for creating custom bot"){data-zoomable}

> ### Setting sidebar 

Reviewer: Move this section to be _before_ the options

> 1. Navigate to the Dashboard 2.0 sidebar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the Dashboard 2.0 sidebar in the Node-RED editor
```

2. Click on the "Edit Settings" button located at the top left side of the Dashboard 2.0 sidebar.
3. Select your preferred sidebar style from the "Style" field in the sidebar options section.

!["Image showing process of changing sidebar style"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-setting-sidebar.gif "Image showing process of changing sidebar style"){data-zoomable}

> ## Styling your Dashboard 2.0 elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Customising your Dashboard 2.0 further
```

> In Dashboard 2.0, we can add classes to almost all widgets, pages, and groups and style them using CSS. Applying styles to these classes will inject the CSS inline, giving them an inline scope. This means the specified styles will take precedence over any existing CSS rules.

Reviewer: The second half of the sentence here isn't true - need to remove it.

```suggestion
In Dashboard 2.0, we can add classes to almost all widgets, pages, and groups and style them using CSS.
```

### Adding classes

1. To add classes to your widget, page, or group, you'll need to open its configuration

> 2. Find the 'Class' field and enter your class.

Reviewer: Add screenshot here add a red rectangle or something around the "class" field row

### Writing custom CSS

> In Dashboard 2.0, the ui-template allows you to write custom CSS for Dashboard 2.0 elements. In the ui-template, you can add CSS for two different scopes: Single page (selecting this allows you to specify CSS for all classes within the selected page) and All pages (selecting this allows you to specify CSS for classes across all pages in a ui-base).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Dashboard 2.0, the `ui-template` node allows you to write custom CSS for Dashboard 2.0. 

In the template node, you can add CSS for two different scopes:

- **Single Page:** Selecting this allows you to specify CSS that is constrained to a single page of your dashboard.
- **All Pages:** Selecting this allows you to define CSS that will apply across your whole dashboard.
```

> 1. Drag an ui-template widget onto the canvas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define your own CSS:

1. Drag an ui-template widget onto the canvas.
```

2. Double-click on it and select the scope within the type field.

> 3. If you select the single-page scope, you'll need to select the page to which your element or class belongs for adding styling. If you select the all-page scope, then you'll need to select the ui-base that includes those pages to which you want to add styling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If you select the "CSS (Single Page)" type, you'll then need to select the `ui-page` to which your custom class definitions will apply. If you select the "CSS (All Pages)" type, then you'll need to select the `ui-base` that includes those pages to which you want to add styling.
```

4. Now you can write your custom CSS within the ui-template.

> !["Screenshot of ui-template widget adding CSS for styling elements of all pages of a ui-base"](./images/node-red-dashboard-2-layout-navigation-styling-adding-style-in-ui-template.png "Screenshot of ui-template widget adding CSS for styling elements of all pages of a ui-base"){data-zoomable}

Reviewer: This would be better as a side-by-side. Left-side showing the widget/group/page on which you've defined the custom class, the right-side then showing the `ui-template` with the defined CSS

> ## Up next 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Up Next 
```

> To delve deeper into Node-RED Dashboard 2.0, explore the following resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To delve deeper into Node-RED Dashboard 2.0, we recommend exploring the following resources:
```
